
The Modify Module
=================

:mod:`diogenes.modify` provides tools for manipulating arrays and
generating features.

-  Cleaning

   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.replace_missing_vals`
   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.label_encode`

-  Selection

   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.choose_cols_where`
   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.choose_rows_where`
   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.remove_cols_where`
   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.remove_rows_where`

-  Feature generation

   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.generate_bin`
   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.normalize`
   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.combine_cols`
   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.distance_from_point`
   -  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.where_all_are_true`

In-place Cleaning
-----------------

Diogenes provides two functions for data cleaning:

-  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.replace_missing_vals`, which replaces
   missing values with valid onces.
-  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.label_encode` which replaces strings
   with corresponding integers.

For this example, we'll look at Chicago's "311 Service Requests - Tree
Debris" data on the Chicago data portal
(https://data.cityofchicago.org/)

.. code:: python

    import diogenes
    
    data = diogenes.read.open_csv_url('https://data.cityofchicago.org/api/views/mab8-y9h3/rows.csv?accessType=DOWNLOAD', 
                                      parse_datetimes=['Creation Date', 'Completion Date'])

The last row of this data set repeats the labels. We're going to go
ahead and omit it.

.. code:: python

    data = data[:-1]

.. code:: python

    data.dtype




.. parsed-literal::

    dtype((numpy.record, [('Creation Date', '<M8[ns]'), ('Status', 'O'), ('Completion Date', '<M8[ns]'), ('Service Request Number', 'O'), ('Type of Service Request', 'O'), ('If Yes, where is the debris located?', 'O'), ('Current Activity', 'O'), ('Most Recent Action', 'O'), ('Street Address', 'O'), ('ZIP Code', '<f8'), ('X Coordinate', '<f8'), ('Y Coordinate', '<f8'), ('Ward', '<f8'), ('Police District', '<f8'), ('Community Area', '<f8'), ('Latitude', '<f8'), ('Longitude', '<f8'), ('Location', 'O')]))



We're going to predict whether a job is still open, so our label will
ultimately be the "Status" column.

.. code:: python

    from collections import Counter
    print Counter(data['Status']).most_common()


.. parsed-literal::

    [('Completed', 94431), ('Completed - Dup', 13912), ('Open', 144), ('Open - Dup', 6)]


We'll remove the label from the rest of the data later. First, let's do
some cleaning. Notice that we have some missing data for our floating
point variables (encoded as numpy.nan)

.. code:: python

    import numpy as np
    print sum(np.isnan(data['ZIP Code']))
    print sum(np.isnan(data['Ward']))
    print sum(np.isnan(data['X Coordinate']))


.. parsed-literal::

    270
    31
    39


Sklearn can't tolerate these missing values, so we have to do something
with them. Probably, a statistically sound thing to do with this data
would be to leave these rows out, but for pedagogical purposes, let's
assume it makes sense to impute the data. We can do that with
:func:`diogenes.modify.modify.replace_missing_vals`.

We could, for instance, replace every nan with a 0:

.. code:: python

    data_with_zeros = diogenes.modify.replace_missing_vals(data, strategy='constant', constant=0)
    print sum(np.isnan(data_with_zeros['ZIP Code']))
    print sum(data_with_zeros['ZIP Code'] == 0)


.. parsed-literal::

    0
    277


Looks like there were a few entries that had 0 for a zip code already.

For the purposes of this tutorial, we will go ahead and replace missing
values with the most frequent value in the column:

.. code:: python

    data = diogenes.modify.replace_missing_vals(data, strategy='most_frequent')

Our data also has a number of string columns. Strings must be converted
to numbers before Scikit-Learn can analyze them, so we will use
:func:`diogenes.modify.modify.label_encode` to convert them

.. code:: python

    print Counter(data['If Yes, where is the debris located?']).most_common()
    data, classes = diogenes.modify.label_encode(data)
    print Counter(data['If Yes, where is the debris located?']).most_common()
    print classes['If Yes, where is the debris located?']


.. parsed-literal::

    [('Parkway', 44385), ('Alley', 43146), ('', 16145), ('Vacant Lot', 4817)]
    [(2, 44385), (1, 43146), (0, 16145), (3, 4817)]
    ['' 'Alley' 'Parkway' 'Vacant Lot']


Note that ``classes`` is a dictionary of arrays where each key is the
column name and each value is an array of which string each number
represents. For example, if we wanted to find out what category ``1``
represents, we would look at:

.. code:: python

    classes['If Yes, where is the debris located?'][1]




.. parsed-literal::

    'Alley'



and find that category 1 is 'Alley'

Selection
---------

Diogenes provides a number of functions to retain only columns and rows
matching a specific criteria:

-  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.choose_cols_where`
-  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.remove_cols_where`
-  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.choose_rows_where`
-  :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.remove_rows_where`

These are explained in detail in the module documentation for
:mod:`diogenes.modify.modify`. Explaining all the different things you
can do with these selection operators is outside the scope of this
tutorial.

We'll start out by removing any columns for which every row is the same
value by employing the :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.col_val_eq_any`
column selection function:

.. code:: python

    print data.dtype.names
    print
    print Counter(data['Type of Service Request'])
    print
    
    arguments = [{'func': diogenes.modify.col_val_eq_any, 'vals': None}]
    data = diogenes.modify.remove_cols_where(data, arguments)
    
    print data.dtype.names


.. parsed-literal::

    ('Creation Date', 'Status', 'Completion Date', 'Service Request Number', 'Type of Service Request', 'If Yes, where is the debris located?', 'Current Activity', 'Most Recent Action', 'Street Address', 'ZIP Code', 'X Coordinate', 'Y Coordinate', 'Ward', 'Police District', 'Community Area', 'Latitude', 'Longitude', 'Location')
    
    Counter({0: 108493})
    
    ('Creation Date', 'Status', 'Completion Date', 'Service Request Number', 'If Yes, where is the debris located?', 'Current Activity', 'Most Recent Action', 'Street Address', 'ZIP Code', 'X Coordinate', 'Y Coordinate', 'Ward', 'Police District', 'Community Area', 'Latitude', 'Longitude', 'Location')


Notice that "Type of Service Request" has been removed, since every
value in the column was the same

Next, let's assume that we're only interested in requests made during
the year 2015 and select only those rows using the
:func:`diogenes.modify.modify.row_val_between` row selection function:

.. code:: python

    print data.shape
    print data['Creation Date'].min()
    print data['Creation Date'].max()
    print
    
    arguments = [{'func': diogenes.modify.row_val_between, 
                  'vals': [np.datetime64('2015-01-01T00:00:00', 'ns'), np.datetime64('2016-01-01T00:00:00', 'ns')], 
                  'col_name': 'Creation Date'}]
    data = diogenes.modify.choose_rows_where(data, arguments)
    
    print data.shape
    print data['Creation Date'].min()
    print data['Creation Date'].max()


.. parsed-literal::

    (108493,)
    2004-07-20T19:00:00.000000000-0500
    2015-11-04T18:00:00.000000000-0600
    
    (15566,)
    2015-01-01T18:00:00.000000000-0600
    2015-11-04T18:00:00.000000000-0600


Finally, let's remove rows which the "Status" column claims are
duplicates. We review our ``classes`` variable to find:

.. code:: python

    classes['Status']




.. parsed-literal::

    array(['Completed', 'Completed - Dup', 'Open', 'Open - Dup'], dtype=object)



We want to remove rows that have either ``1`` or ``3`` in the status
column. We don't have a row selection function already defined to select
rows that have one of several discrete values, so we will create one:

.. code:: python

    def row_val_in(M, col_name, vals):
        return np.logical_or(M[col_name] == vals[0], M[col_name] == vals[1])
    
    print data.shape
    print Counter(data['Status']).most_common()
    print
    
    arguments = [{'func': row_val_in, 'vals': [1, 3], 'col_name': 'Status'}]
    data2 = diogenes.modify.remove_rows_where(data, arguments)
    
    print data2.shape
    print Counter(data2['Status']).most_common()


.. parsed-literal::

    (15566,)
    [(0, 13806), (1, 1612), (2, 144), (3, 4)]
    
    (13950,)
    [(0, 13806), (2, 144)]


Feature Generation
------------------

We can also create new features based on existing data. We'll start out
by generating a feature that calculates the distance of the service
request from Cloud Gate in downtown Chicago ``(41.882773, -87.623304)``
using :func:`diogenes.modify.modify.distance_from_point`.

.. code:: python

    dist_from_cloud_gate = diogenes.modify.distance_from_point(41.882773, -87.623304, data['Latitude'], data['Longitude'])
    print dist_from_cloud_gate[:10]


.. parsed-literal::

    [ 12.37824118  13.37711223  18.95988034  26.2061016   20.18279666
      12.08154288  17.63119029  21.29986356   8.09220669  11.27721597]


Now we'll put those distances into 10 bins using
:func:`diogenes.modify.modify.generate_bin`.

.. code:: python

    dist_binned = diogenes.modify.generate_bin(dist_from_cloud_gate, 10)
    print dist_binned[:10]


.. parsed-literal::

    [4, 4, 6, 9, 7, 4, 6, 7, 2, 4]


Now we'll make a binary feature that is true if and only if the tree is
in a parkway in ward 10 using
:func:`diogenes.modify.modify.where_all_are_true` (which has similar
syntax to the selection functions).

.. code:: python

    print classes['If Yes, where is the debris located?']


.. parsed-literal::

    ['' 'Alley' 'Parkway' 'Vacant Lot']


We note that "Parkway" is category 2, so we will select items that equal
2 in the "If Yes, where is the debris located?" column and 10 in the
"Ward" column.

.. code:: python

    arguments = [{'func': diogenes.modify.row_val_eq, 
                  'col_name': 'If Yes, where is the debris located?',
                  'vals': 2},
                 {'func': diogenes.modify.row_val_eq,
                  'col_name': 'Ward',
                  'vals': 10}]
    parkway_in_ward_10 = diogenes.modify.where_all_are_true(data, arguments)
    print np.where(parkway_in_ward_10)


.. parsed-literal::

    (array([    3,   149,   174,   248,   274,   277,   598,   672,   675,
             698,   796,   945,   949,   963,  1061,  1184,  1206,  1408,
            1509,  1799,  1902,  2077,  2177,  2185,  2193,  2213,  2215,
            2230,  2341,  2439,  2444,  2562,  2668,  2683,  2790,  2807,
            2943,  3181,  3189,  3230,  3232,  3235,  3236,  3237,  3339,
            3345,  3603,  3609,  3624,  3639,  3824,  3950,  3979,  3998,
            4002,  4005,  4208,  4224,  4274,  4378,  4391,  4440,  4446,
            4460,  4486,  4557,  4558,  4630,  4751,  4893,  5074,  5190,
            5224,  5266,  5288,  5296,  5328,  5372,  5373,  5399,  5531,
            5603,  5613,  5728,  5729,  5819,  6040,  6052,  6056,  6191,
            6192,  6517,  6528,  6593,  6682,  7038,  7376,  7387,  7397,
            7398,  7600,  7883,  7884,  7948,  8132,  8177,  8344,  8499,
            8516,  8682,  8691,  8699,  8718,  8773,  8776,  8912,  8955,
            9333,  9424,  9435,  9501,  9518,  9681, 10363, 10731, 10732,
           10735, 11107, 11259, 11268, 11288, 11582, 11590, 11777, 11956,
           12064, 12135, 13028, 13067, 13402, 13493, 13603, 13787, 14093,
           14466, 14484, 14553, 14618, 14625, 14632, 14915, 15248, 15356,
           15364, 15407]),)


Finally, we'll add all of our generated features to our data using
:func:`diogenes.utils.append_cols`

.. code:: python

    data = diogenes.utils.append_cols(data, [dist_from_cloud_gate, dist_binned, parkway_in_ward_10],
                                      ['dist_from_cloud_gate', 'dist_binned', 'parkway_in_ward_10'])
    print data.dtype


.. parsed-literal::

    [('Creation Date', '<M8[ns]'), ('Status', '<i8'), ('Completion Date', '<M8[ns]'), ('Service Request Number', '<i8'), ('If Yes, where is the debris located?', '<i8'), ('Current Activity', '<i8'), ('Most Recent Action', '<i8'), ('Street Address', '<i8'), ('ZIP Code', '<f8'), ('X Coordinate', '<f8'), ('Y Coordinate', '<f8'), ('Ward', '<f8'), ('Police District', '<f8'), ('Community Area', '<f8'), ('Latitude', '<f8'), ('Longitude', '<f8'), ('Location', '<i8'), ('dist_from_cloud_gate', '<f8'), ('dist_binned', '<i8'), ('parkway_in_ward_10', '?')]


Last steps
----------

Now, all we have to do is make remove the "Status" column from the rest
of the data (along with the highly correlated "Completion Date") and
we're ready to run an experiment.

.. code:: python

    labels = data['Status']
    M = diogenes.utils.remove_cols(data, ['Status', 'Completion Date'])
    exp = diogenes.grid_search.experiment.Experiment(M, labels)
    exp.run()




.. parsed-literal::

    [Trial(clf=<class 'sklearn.ensemble.forest.RandomForestClassifier'>, clf_params={}, subset=<class 'diogenes.grid_search.subset.SubsetNoSubset'>, subset_params={}, cv=<class 'sklearn.cross_validation.KFold'>, cv_params={})]



